Add Ag cohorts analysis 20240924 (#35)
malariagen/vobs-updates: _posts/2024-10-02-ag3-cohorts-v20240924.md

---
layout: post
title:  "Ag3 cohorts analysis version 20240924"
tags: data
---

A new cohorts analysis version `20240924` has been released for the
Ag3 data resource. This is now the default cohorts analysis version
when using the `malariagen_data` [Ag3
API](https://malariagen.github.io/malariagen-data-python/latest/Ag3.html). This

> cohorts analysis is available for datasets up to and including Ag3.11.

Reviewer: I have been following the approach where we declare up to the release that will be covered by this cohorts analysis, even if the release is not public yet. So I'd suggest:
```suggestion
cohorts analysis will be available for datasets up to and including Ag3.13.
```

Please note that the new cohorts analysis may change the values of
sample metadata columns including `taxon`, `admin1_iso`,
`admin1_name`, `admin2_name`, and derived columns beginning `cohorts_`
relative to previous cohorts analysis versions.

To pin this cohorts analysis when accessing data:

{% highlight python %}
import malariagen_data

ag3 = malariagen_data.Ag3(
    cohorts_analysis="20240924",
)
{% endhighlight %}

This new version introduces some key changes: 

- Samples previously labeled as `gcx1` in the `taxon` field have been renamed to `bissau`:
    - `gcx` (`gambiae complex cryptic taxa`) labels serve as placeholders for groups outside our usual taxonomic assignment 
    - Following [Caputo et al. (2024)](https://malariagen.github.io/vobs-updates/2024/09/10/caputo.html), the `gcx1` group has been renamed to `Bissau molecular form`
    - 291 samples previously assigned as `gcx1`, are now labeled as `bissau`.
    - 5 previously `unassigned` samples are also relabeled as `bissau`.
    - Cohort names have been updated, e.g. `GM-M_gcx1_2019` is now `GM-M_biss_2019`

> - 36 `unassigned` samples have been reclassified as: 32 `melas`, 2`gambiae`, 1 `fontenillei`, 1 `arabiensis`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 36 previously `unassigned` samples have been reclassified as: 32 `melas`, 2`gambiae`, 1 `fontenillei`, 1 `arabiensis`.
```
